あげる (1)	
Someone gives something to a person who is not a member of the giver’s in group but whose status is about equal to that of the giver.
Give
	B. 63
あげる (2)	
Someone gives some action as a favour to a person who is not a member of the giver’s in group but whose status is about equal of the giver.
Do something for someone; do someone a favour by doing something
	B. 65
間・あいだ(に)	
The space between two temporal or physical points.
During (the time when); while
	B. 67
あまり	
The degree of something is not great.
(not) very much; (not) very
	B. 72
ある (1)	
An inanimate thing exists.
Be; exist; have
	B. 73
ある (2)	
Something has been done to something and the resultant state of that action remains.
Have been done; be done
	B. 76
あとで	
Some state or action takes place at a time (not always immediately) after another state or action has taken place.
After
	B. 78
ば	
A conjunction which indicates that the preceding clause expresses a conditional.
If
	B. 81
ばかり	
A particle which indicates that something is the only thing or state which exists, or the action someone will take, takes, is taking or took.
Only; just; be ready to do something; have just done something; just did something; be just doing something; about
	B. 84
ばよかった	
A phrase which expresses the speaker’s regret.
I wish ~ had done something
	B. 87
だい	
A sentence final particle which indicates an interrogative word question in informal male speech.
	B. 90
だけ	
A particle which expresses a limit imposed upon something that is growing and expanding.
Only; just; alone; merely; that’s all
	B. 93
だけで(は)なく～(も)	
Not only X but also Y, where X and Y can be either a noun, a verb, or an adjective.
Not only ~ but also ~
	B. 97
だろう	
An auxiliary indicating the speaker’s conjecture which is not based on any particular information or evidence.
Probably
	B. 100
出す・だす	
Something that has been latent is realised.
Out; begin to; start to
	B. 102
で (1)	
A particle which indicates location, except for location of existence.
At; in; on
	B. 105
で (2)	
A particle which indicates the use of something for doing something.
By; for; from; in; on; using; with
	B. 106
で (3)	
A particle (apparently derived from the て form of です) that indicates a weak causal relationship.
And; because of; due to; because
	B. 107
で (4)	
A particle which indicates the time when something terminates or the amount of time a period of activity has taken.
At; on; in
	B. 109
でも	
The て form of です plus も ‘even’.
Even
	B. 111
どう	
An interrogative adverb which asks about the state of someone/something or the way of doing something.
How; in what way
	B. 114
へ	
A particle that indicates the direction toward which some directional movement or action proceeds.
To; towards
	B. 116
が (1)	
A particle which indicates the subject.
	B. 118
が (2)	
A disjunctive coordinate conjunction that combines two sentences.
But
	B. 120
がる	
An auxiliary verb attached to a psychological/physiological adjective meaning a person other than the speaker shows signs of ~
Show signs of ~
	B. 123
ごろ	
Approximately (with a specific point of time).
About; around
	B. 126
ごとに	
Something takes place regularly in succession after a certain temporal or spatial interval.
Every
	B. 128
始める・はじめる	
Someone/something begins to do something or begins to be in some state.
Begin to
	B. 131
はず	
A dependant noun which expresses the speaker’s expectation that something will take place or took place or that someone/something is or was in some state.
I expect that ~; it is expected that ~; ~ is expected to; I am fairly certain that ~; should; ought to; it is natural that ~; no wonder ~
	B. 133
ほど	
A particle which indicates an extent or a degree to which someone/something does something or is in some state.
To the extent of; to the extent that ~; (not as) ~ as ~; about
	B. 135
ほうがいい	
It is strongly suggested that someone do something.
Had better do something
	B. 138
ほうが~より	
Comparing two entities, one is in some state or does something more than the other.
~ be more (adjective) than ~; ~ do something more (adverb) than ~ do
	B. 140
欲しい・ほしい (1)	
Something is desired by the speaker.
Want (something)
	B. 144
欲しい・ほしい (2)	
Want someone (who is not higher in status than the speaker) to do something.
Want (someone) to do (something)
	B. 146
一番・いちばん	
A superlative marker.
Most
	B. 148
行く・いく (1)	
Someone or something moves in a direction away from the speaker or the speaker’s viewpoint.
Go; come
	B. 149
行く・いく (2)	
Some action or state keeps changing from the point in time at which the speaker first describes the action.
Go on ~ing; continue; grow; become
	B. 151
いる (1)	
An animate thing exists.
Be; exist; stay
	B. 153
いる (2)	
Someone or something is doing something he or it started some time ago, or is in a state created by an action he or it took some time ago.
>Be ~ing; have done (something)
	B. 155
要る・いる (3)	
Someone, something needs something
Need
	B. 157
自分・じぶん (1)	
A reflexive pronoun that refers (back) to a human subject with whom the speaker is empathising.
~ self; own
	B. 159
自分・じぶん (2)	
A reflexive pronoun that refers (back) to a human subject, the referent of which is contrasted with someone else.
~ self; own
	B. 161
か (1)	
A particle which marks an alternative.
(either) ~ or ~
	B. 164
か (2)	
A sentence final particle which indicates that the preceding sentence is interrogative.
Whether; if
	B. 166
か(どうか)	
A marker for an embedded yes-no question.
Whether or not; if (~ or not)
	B. 168
かい	
A sentence final particle which marks yes-no questions in informal male speech.
	B. 170
かもしれない	
Can't tell if ~
Might
	B. 173
から (1)	
A particle which indicates a starting point or a source.
From; since; out of
	B. 176
から (2)	
After/since a point in time at which something takes place.
After; having done something; since (time)
	B. 177
から (3)	
A subordinate conjunction which expresses a reason or a cause.
So; since; because
	B. 179
かしら	
A sentence final particle which expresses the idea that the female speaker wonders about something.
I wonder
	B. 181
方・かた	
A noun forming suffix that indicates a way or a manner in which one does something.
A way of; a manner of; how to
	B. 183
代わりに・かわりに	
Something (including an action) replaces something else.
In place of ~; instead of; to make up for ~; although; but
	B. 184
けれども	
A disjunctive subordinate conjunction that combines two sentences.
Although; though
	B. 187
聞こえる・きこえる	
Something is passively and spontaneously audiable.
Audible; (can) hear; it sounds
	B. 188
嫌いだ・きらいだ	
Something or someone is what someone does not like.
Don’t like; dislike
	B. 190
こと (1)	
A thing which is intangible.
Thing; what
	B. 191
こと (2)	
A nominaliser used to indicate the speaker’s relative lack of empathy with the content of the sentence he is nominalising.
To ~; ~ing; that
	B. 193
ことがある (1)	
There was a time when ~
Someone has done something; someone has had an experience doing something; there was a time when ~
	B. 196
ことがある (2)	
There are times when ~.
	B. 198
ことが出来る・できる	
Doing something is possible
Can; be able to
	B. 200
ことになる	
An event takes place as if spontaneously, irrespective of the speaker's volition.
It will be decided that ~; come about ~; be arranged that ~; turn out that ~
	B. 202
ことにする	
A volitional decision to do something is made.
Decide to
	B. 204
ことは	
Speaking of proposition X, X is certainly true.
Indeed one does something alright, (but ~); indeed ~ (but ~); do ~ (but ~)
	B. 206
下さい・ください	
An auxiliary verb which indicates a polite request.
Please do something
	B. 209
君・くん	
A suffix attached to the first or last name of a male equal or to the first or last name of a person whose status or rank is lower than the speaker’s.
	B. 211
くらい	
Approximate quantity or extent.
Approximately; about
	B. 212
呉れる・くれる (1)	
Someone whose status is not higher than the speaker’s gives something to the first person or to someone with whom the speaker empathises.
Give
	B. 213
呉れる・くれる (2)	
Someone does something as a favour to the first person or to someone with whom the speaker empathises.
Do something (for me or someone); do me or someone a favour by doing something
	B. 216
来る・くる (1)	
Someone or something moves in a direction towards the speaker or the speaker’s viewpoint or area of empathy.
Come; visit; show up
	B. 219
来る・くる (2)	
An auxiliary verb which indicates the beginning of some process or continuation of some action up to a current point of time.
Come about; grow; come to; begin to
	B. 221
まだ	
Someone or something is in some state he or it was in some time ago.
Still; (not) yet
	B. 224
まで	
A particle to indicate a spatial, temporal or quantitative limit or an unexpected animate/inanimate object.
As far as; till; up to; until; through; even
	B. 225
までに	
A particle that indicates a time limit on/for an action.
By; by the time (when)
	B. 228
前に・まえに	
In front of or before some situation comes about.
Before; in front of
	B. 231
毎・まい	
A prefix which means ‘every (unit of time)’.
Every; per
	B. 233
まま	
An already given situation or condition remains unaltered.
As it is; unchanged; undisturbed; leave as is; remain
	B. 236
ましょう	
A verb ending which indicates the first person’s volition or invitation in formal speech.
I/We will do something; Let’s do something.
	B. 240
見える・みえる	
Someone or something is passively/spontaneously visible.
Be visible; (can) see; look ~
	B. 243
みる	
Do something to see what it’s like or what will happen.
Do something and see; try to do something
	B. 246
も	
A particle which indicates that a proposition about the preceeding element X is also true when another similar proposition is true.
Too; also; (not) ~ either
	B. 247
も (2)	
A marker which indicates emphasis.
Even; as many/much/long/...as; (not) even (one); (not) any
	B. 250
もう	
Someone or something is no longer in the same state that he or it was in some time ago.
(not) anymore; (not) any longer; already; yet; now
	B. 254
も~も	
The repeated use of a particle meaning ‘also’ to list elements belonging to the same part of speech.
Both ~ and ~; neither ~ nor
	B. 255
もの（だ）	
The speaker presents some situation as if it were a tangible object.
Because; how could ~!; used to; should like to; should
	B. 257
もらう (1)	
The first person or someone the speaker empathises with receives something from someone whose status is not as high as the receiver’s.
Get; receive; be given
	B. 261
もらう (2)	
The first person or someone the speaker empathizes with receives some benefit from an action by someone whose status is not as high as the receiver’s.
Receive benefit from an action by someone; have something done by someone; have someone do something.
	B. 263
な	
A negative imperative marker used by a male speaker in very informal speech
Don't do ~
	B. 266
など	
A marker that indicates exemplification.
And so on; and the like; for example; things like ~
	B. 267
ながら	
A conjunction which indicates that the action expressed by the preceding verb takes place concurrently or simultaneously with the action expressed in the main clause.
While; over; with
	B. 269
ないで	
A negative て form of a verb.
Do not do something and; without doing ~
	B. 271
なければならない	
It won’t do if someone does not take some action or if someone or something is not in some state.
Have to; must; need
	B. 274
なくなる	
It has reached the point where some state or action does not take place anymore.
Not ~ any more
	B. 277
なくて	
A て form of the negative ない, which indicates a cause/reason for a state or action.
Do not do something and ~; is not ~ and ~; because ~ do not do something
	B. 279
なら	
A conjunction which indicates that the preceding sentence is the speaker’s supposition about the truth of a present or past fact or the actualisation of something in the future.
If it is true that; if it is the case that; if; would; could
	B. 281
なさい	
A polite imperative used by superiors such as parents or teachers to their inferiors (=people of younger age and lower rank)
Do something
	B. 284
ね	
A sentence final particle that indicates the speaker’s request for confirmation or agreement from the hearer about some shared knowledge.
English tag question (such as isn’t it?; is it?; don’t you?; do you?); you know
	B. 286
に (1)	
A particle that indicates a point of time at which something takes place.
At; in; on
	B. 289
に (2)	
An indirect object marker.
To; for
	B. 291
に (3)	
A particle that indicates an agent or a source in passive, causative, もらう/てまらう and other receiving constructions.
By; from
	B. 292
に (4)	
A particle that indicates the surface of something upon which some action directly takes place.
On; onto
	B. 295
に (5)	
A particle which indicates purpose when someone moves from one place to another.
To do something; in order to do something
	B. 297
に (6)	
A particle which indicates the location where someone or something exists.
In; at; on
	B. 299
に (7)	
A particle which indicates a place toward which someone or something moves.
To; toward.
	B. 302
に違いない・にちがいない	
The speaker is convinced that there is no mistake on his part in guessing something.
There is no doubt that ~; must be ~; no doubt
	B. 304
難い・にくい	
Something or someone is hard to ~.
Hard to ~; difficult to ~; don’t do something easily; not readily; not prone to ~
	B. 307
にしては	
A phrase that indicates a generally agreed upon standard (the entire sentence that includes this phrase expresses some deviation from that standard.)
For ~; considering that ~
	B. 309
にする	
Someone has decided on something.
Decide on ~; make it ~
	B. 310
の (1)	
A particle which, with a preceding noun phrase, forms a phrase to modify a following noun phrase.
‘s; of; in; at; for; by; from
	B. 312
の (2)	
A dependent indefinite pronoun.
One
	B. 315
の (3)	
A nominaliser which is used when the nominalised sentence expresses a directly perceptible event.
That ~; to do something; doing something
	B. 318
の (4)	
A sentence-final particle used by a female or a child to indicate an explanation or emotive emphasis.
It is that ~
	B. 322
のだ	
A sentence ending which indicates that the speaker is explaining or asking for an explanation about some information shared with the hearer, or is talking about something emotively, as if it were of common interest to the speaker and the hearer.
The explanation is that ~; The reason is that ~; The fact is that ~; It is that ~
	B. 325
ので	
A subordinate conjunction which expresses a reason or a cause.
So; since; because
	B. 328
のに (1)	
Contrary to everybody’s expectation based on the sentence preceding のに, the proposition in the sentence following のに is the case.
Even though; despite the fact that ~; although; but; in spite of the fact that ~
	B. 331
のに (2)	
In the process or for the purpose of doing something expressed in the の nominalised clause.
In the process of doing ~; (in order) to do ~; for the purpose of ~
	B. 335
のは～だ	
A structure that indicates new, important information by placing it between のは and the copula だ (の is an indefinite pronoun (の2) that replaces ‘time’,’person’, ‘thing’, ‘place’ or ‘reason’.)
It is ~ that ~; the one who ~ is ~; the place where ~ is ~; the reason why ~ is ~; the time when ~ is ~; what ~ is ~
	B. 337
お	
A prefix that expresses politeness.
	B. 343
を (1)	
A particle which marks a direct object.
	B. 347
を (2)	
A particle which indicates a space in/on/across/through/along which someone or something moves.
In; on; across; through; along; over
	B. 349
を (3)	
A particle that marks the location from which some movement begins.
	B. 351
を (4)	
A particle that marks the cause of some human emotion.
	B. 352
多い・おおい	
(of quantity or number) a lot
Many; a lot of; much
	B. 354
おく	
Do something in advance for future convenience.
Do something in advance; go ahead and do something; let someone/something remain as he/it is
	B. 357
お～になる	
A phrase which expresses the speaker’s respect for someone when describing that person’s action or state
	B. 358
お～する	
A phrase which humbly expresses the speaker’s politeness to someone when describing the speaker’s action or state that involves or affects that person.
	B. 360
終わる・おわる	
Finish doing ~
Finish; end
	B. 362
られる (1)	
A state or an action cannot be controlled by someone or something.
Be –ed; get –ed
	B. 364
られる (2)	
An auxiliary verb which indicates potential.
Be able to do something; can do something; be –able; ~ can be done
	B. 370
らしい	
An auxiliary adjective which indicates that the preceding sentence is the speaker’s conjecture based on what he has heard, read or seen.
Seem; look like; apparently; I heard
	B. 373
Relative Clause	
	B. 376
さ	
A suffix that makes a noun out of an adjective by attaching it to the stem of an Adj (い) or much less frequently to the stem of an Adj (な)
-ness; -ly
	B. 381
様・さま	
A suffix (originally meaning 'appearance') that indicates the speaker's/writer's politeness towards someone.
Mr; Miss; Ms; Mrs
	B. 384
させる	
Cause someone/something to do something or cause something to change its state.
Make someone/something do something; cause someone/something to do something; let someone/something do something; allow someone/something to do something; have someone/something do something; get someone/something to do something.
	B. 387
せっかく	
Some situation which seldom occurs has now occurred and one can either make use of it or, to one’s regret, cannot make use of it.
With effort; at great pain; take the trouble to do ~
	B. 392
し	
A conjunction to indicate ‘and’ in an emphatic way.
And what’s more; not only ~ but also ~; so
	B. 395
しい	
An infix attached to the stem of an adjective い to indicate something that one cannot objectively measure on any scale (e.g. human emotion).
	B. 397
しか	
A particle which marks an element X when nothing but X makes the expressed proposition true.
Nothing/nobody/no ~ but; only
	B. 398
しまう	
An auxiliary verb which indicates the completion of an action.
Have dome something; finish doing something; finish something up
	B. 403
知る・しる	
Someone gets information from some outside source.
Get to know
	B. 406
そうだ (1)	
An auxiliary which indicates that the information expressed by the preceding sentence is what the speaker heard.
I hear that ~; I heard that ~; people say that ~
	B. 407
そうだ (2)	
An auxiliary adjective which indicates that what is expressed by the preceding sentence is the speaker’s conjecture concerning an event in the future or the present state of someone or something, based on what the speaker sees or feels.
Look; look like; appear; seem; feel like
	B. 410
それで	
A conjunction to indicate that what is stated in the preceding sentence is the reason or cause for what is stated in the following sentence.
And; because of that; that is why; therefore; so
	B. 413
それでは	
If that is the case
If so; then; well then
	B. 414
それから	
A conjunction that indicates (1) temporally contiguous actions or states, or (2) a cumulative listing of objects, actions or states.
After that; and then; in addition to that
	B. 416
それなら	
If that is the case,
Then; in that case
	B. 419
それとも	
A coordinate conjunction which connects two alternatives expressed by sentences.
Or; either ~ or ~
	B. 421
そして	
A coordinate conjunction that connects two sentences.
And; and then
	B. 422
過ぎる・すぎる	
Someone/something does something excessively or is in a state excessively.
Too; do something too much/often; over-
	B. 423
好きだ・すきだ	
Something or someone is what someone likes.
Like; be fond of
	B. 426
少ない・すくない	
Small in number of quantity.
Few; a small number of; little; a small quantity of ~
	B. 427
する (1)	
Someone/something causes a state or action to take place.
Do; make; play; play the role of ~; wear
	B. 428
する (2)	
Someone or something has some (semi)permanent attribute.
Have
	B. 434
する (3)	
Something is perceived by someone’s non-visual senses.
Fear; smell; hear
	B. 435
する (4)	
A verb that indicates how much something costs or a duration of time.
Cost; lapse
	B. 436
すると	
A coordinate conjunction which connects two sentences (the second sentence either describes an event which takes place right after the event described in the first sentence or it expresses a logical guess related to the event in the first sentence.)
Thereupon ~; then ~; and ~
	B. 437
たい	
An auxiliary adjective which expresses a desire to do something.
Want (to do something); would like (to do something)
	B. 441
堪らない・たまらない	
The speaker or whomever he empathises with cannot cope with a situation expressed by the て phrase.
Unbearably ~; extremely; be dying to do ~
	B. 445
為（に）・ため（に）	
A noun that indicates a benefit, a purpose, a reason or a cause.
On account of ~; for the benefit of ~; for the good of ~; for the sake of ~; on behalf of ~; for the purpose of ~; in order to ~; because of ~; owing to ~
	B. 447
たら	
A subordinate conjunction which indicates that the action/state expressed by the main clause in a sentence takes place after the action/state expressed by the subordinate clause.
If; when; after
	B. 452
たらどうですか	
A phrase which expresses a suggestion (literally: How would you feel if you do something?)
Why don't you do ~?; what about doing ~?
	B. 457
たり～たりする	
A phrase which expresses an inexhaustive listing of action or states.
Do things like ~ and ~; sometimes ~ and sometimes ~
	B. 458
たって	
Even if someone did something or something were in some state (the desired result would not come about) or even if someone or something is in some state.
Even if ~
	B. 461
て	
The て form ending of verbs and い-type adjectives (The て form ending of な-type adjectives and the て form of the copula is で.)
And; -ing
	B. 464
ても	
ても is used when that which is expressed in the main clause is not what is expected from the content of the dependent (ても) clause.
Even if; although
	B. 468
てもいい	
A phrase which expresses persmission or concession.
May; It is all right if
	B. 471
と (1)	
A particle which lists things exhaustively.
And
	B. 473
と (2)	
A particle marking the noun phrase which maintains a reciprocal relationship with the subject of a clause.
With; as; from
	B. 476
と (3)	
A particle which marks a quotation, sound or the manner in which someone/something does something.
That; with the sound of; in the manner of
	B. 478
と (4)	
A subordinate conjunction which marks a condition that brings about an uncontrollable event or state.
If; when
	B. 480
と言えば	
An expression which presents as the topic of a following discourse a phrase which has just been uttered.
Speaking of ~
	B. 484
という	
A phrase marking information which identifies or explains the noun following the phrase.
Called; that says ~; that
	B. 486
とか	
A conjunction that lists two or more items, actions or states as inexhaustive examples.
And; or
	B. 488
時・とき	
A dependent noun which indicates the time when someone/something will do/does/did something or the time when someone/something will be/is/was in some state.
At the time when; when
	B. 490
ところだ (1)	
A place is in a location which takes a certain amount of time to get to.
~ is (in) a place where it takes ~ to get to
	B. 495
ところだ (2)	
Someone/something is in the state where he/it is just about to do something, is doing something, has done something, or has been doing something.
Be just about to do something; be in the midst of doing something; have just done something; have been doing something; almost did something
	B. 496
として	
A compound particle which indicates the capacity, role or function of someone or something.
As; in the capacity of
	B. 501
としては	
A compound particle which indicates a standard for comparisons.
For
	B. 502
つもり	
An intention or conviction of a speaker (or a person with whom the speaker can empathise) about his future or past actions or current state.
Intend to ~; be convinced that ~; believe; feel sure that ~; be going to; mean
	B. 503
って (1)	
A colloquial topic-introducer.
Speaking of ~
	B. 507
って (2)	
A colloquial quotation marker.
That
	B. 510
うちに	
During a period when a certain situation remains in effect.
While; before; during
	B. 512
は (1)	
A particle which marks a topic or a contrastive element.
Talking about ~; as for ~; the
	B. 516
わ (2)	
A sentence final particle used in weak assertive or volitional sentences by a female speaker.
	B. 520
は～だ	
Someone or something is/was someone or something or is/was in some state, or will do/does/did something.
	B. 521
は～が	
A construction which relates a non-controllable state of something or someone to a topic
	B. 525
はいけない	
A phrase which indicates prohibition.
Cannot do something; must not do something; don’t do something; should not do something
	B. 528
分かる・わかる	
Can figure out (spontaneously) various facts –such as content, nature, value, meaning, cause, reason, result– about something whose existence is presupposed.
Be comprehensible; understand; can tell; figure out
	B. 529
わけだ	
The speaker's conclusion obtained through deductive, logical judgment or calculation on the basis of what he has heard or read.
No wonder; so it means that ~; that's why; should ~; I take it that ~; naturally
	B. 531
屋・や	
A suffix attached to names of stores, inns and Japanese style restaurants or to persons engaged in certain occupations
Store
	B. 535
や	
A coordinate conjunction that is used to list two or more items (nouns or noun phrases) in an inexhaustive fashion.
And
	B. 536
やはり	
An adverb indicating that the actual situation expectedly/anticipatively conforms to a standard based on past experience, comparison with other people, or common sense.
Still; also; after all; as expected; you know
	B. 538
易い・やすい	
Something or someone is easy to ~.
Easy to; ready to; be apt to; prone to; do something easily
	B. 541
ようだ	
An auxiliary な type adjective which expresses the likelihood of something/someone or the likeness of something/someone to something/someone.
Look like; look as if; be like; appear; seem
	B. 547
ように (1)	
Do something in such a way that ~.
So that
	B. 553
ように (2)	
An adverbial form of ようだ
As; like
	B. 554
ように言う	
Tell someone in such a way that he will do something.
Tell ~ to ~; say ~ in such a way
	B. 556
ようになる	
Some change takes place gradually.
Reach the point where ~; come to ~; it has come to be that ~; have finally become
	B. 559
ようにする	
Someone causes some circumstantial or behavioural change to take place.
Do ~ in such a way that ~; see to it that ~; make sure that ~; bring it about that ~
	B. 562
より (1)	
A particle which indicates that something/someone is being compared with something/someone.
Than; rather ~ than ~; more ~ than ~
	B. 564
より (2)	
A particle which indicates a set point in terms of space or time.
In ~ of; inside; outside; before; after
	B. 567
ようと思う	
The speaker desires or decides to do something.
~ think ~ will
	B. 569
ずつ	
A particle that indicates equal distribution of quantity.
By; at a time.
	B. 572
あまり	
A conjunction which marks a cause that involves excessive action.
Because of too much ~; because ~ too much; so ~ that ~
	I. 3
~ば~ほど	
A structure indicating that something happens in proportion to the increase of extent/degree of action or state.
The more ~, the more ~
	I. 6
~ばかりか~（さえ）	
A compound particle/conjunction which is used to connect two nouns or two sentences, the first of which is something normally expected and the second of which is something normally unexpected.
Not only ~ but also
	I. 8
べきだ	
An auxiliary which expresses the speaker's judgment that someone/something should do something or should be in some state.
Should; ought to
	I. 11
分	
A suffix which indicates the amount of something.
For ~; ~ worth; amount equivalent to ~; portion
	I. 16
だが	
A conjunction that expresses something that is contrasted with what is expressed in the previous sentence.
But; however; yet; nevertheless
	I. 18
だからと言って	
A coordinate conjunction indicating that even if one accepts a premise expressed in the preceding sentence(s) one cannot jump to an expected conclusion from the premise.
However, it doesn't follow from this that ~; but it doesn't mean that ~; because of that
	I. 21
だけで	
A phrase which expresses the idea that just doing something is enough for something.
Just V-ing is enough; can just ~; just by V-ing
	I. 23
だらけ	
A suffix that indicates that something/someone is covered or filled with something undesirable.
Full of; filled with; covered with
	I. 25
で	
A particle which indicates a basic quantity, for each of which certain amount is associated.
For; per
	I. 27
であろう	
An auxiliary which indicates the writer's conjecture which is not based on any particular information or evidence.
Probably
	I. 29
である	
A copula which is used in formal writing and formal speech.
Be
	I. 31
どころか	
A conjunction indicating that someone/something is very far from an expected state.
Far from; not just; even
	I. 34
どうも	
An adverb to indicate that one cannot make a definite statement about something due to lack of hard evidence.
I don't know why but; I cannot manage to; just; from what I gather; seem; no matter how ~; I gather that ~; for some reason
	I. 36
どんなに~（こと）か	
A structure that indicates an exclamation about the degree to which an action or state takes/took place.
How ~ (!)
	I. 39
どうせ	
An adverb that indicates the speaker/writer's feeling that no matter what s/he does or how s/he does it, the situation will not change.
In any case; anyway; at all events; after all; at all
	I. 41
風に	
With an appearance/style/tone/manner of ~.
In ~ manner; after ~ style; a la ~; like
	I. 44
がち	
A suffix to express an undesirable tendency in someone or something.
Tend to; be prone to; be apt to; be liable to; be subject to; often
	I. 47
がたい	
An auxiliary adjective which expresses the idea that for someone to do something is virtually impossible or impossible.
Cannot; un—able; can hardly; difficult to; impossible
	I. 50
逆に	
An adverb to introduce an event which takes place contrary to one's expectation/intention, or an action or event which is converse to that stated in the preceding sentence or clause.
Contrary to one's expectation; contrary to one's intention; conversely
	I. 53
ほど	
A particle which indicates the extent or the degree to which someone/something does something or is in some state.
The ~, the ~; as; to the extent
	I. 57
以外	
A dependent noun which means "something/someone other than".
Other than; except (for); but; besides; as well as
	I. 60
以上（は）	
A conjunction indicating the speaker/writer's feeling that there should be a very strong logical/natural connection between wht precedes the conjunction and what follows it.
Since; now that; once; if ~ at all; as long as; so long as
	I. 64
いかにも	
An adverb that indicates the speaker/writer's emotive conviction.
Really; truly; indeed
	I. 66
Imperative	
Verb forms which indicate commands or requests.
(don't) V.; No -ing; (not) to V
	I. 70
一方で（は） ~ 他方で（は）	
A structure used to describe two concurring, contrastive actions/states of someone or something.
On the one hand ~, on the other hand
	I. 73
上	
A suffix which indicates the idea of "from the viewpoint of," "for the sake of," "for the reason," or "in terms of".
From the viewpoint of; for (the sake of); for (the reason); in (terms of); relating to; in –ing
	I. 76
かえって	
Contrary to one's expectation an opposite result comes about.
On the contrary; rather
	I. 80
限り	
A conjunction which expresses the idea "as long as (a certain condition is met)" or "as long as (= to the extent)".
As long as; as far as; while; to the extent; until; unless
	I. 82
限り (2)	
A suffix which expresses the idea of "(last) only until" or "limited".
The last; only until; from ~ on; limited to; only
	I. 85
か~か	
A structure to mark two choices or possibilities about which the speaker/writer is not sure.
Whether ~ or; or
	I. 87
かな	
A sentence-final particle that indicates a self-addressed question or a question addressed to an in-group member.
I wonder if ~
	I. 90
必ずしも	
An adverb that indicates that the proposition expressed in the sentence is not always true.
Not always; not necessarily
	I. 92
かねる	
An auxiliary expressing that someone cannot do something even if s/he wants to do it.
Cannot; be not in a position to; hardly possible; hard; hesitate to do
	I. 96
から~に至るまで	
A structure that expresses a wide range of things.
Starting with ~ ending with ~; from ~ to ~
	I. 99
から~にかけて	
A structure that expresses coverage from one time/location into the other.
Through ~ into ~; through ~ on to; from ~ till/to
	I. 101
からと言って	
A conjunction which introduces the reason for someone's action or for someone's having some idea, and conveys disapproval of the action or idea.
Just because; even if; even though
	I. 103
かろう	
An auxiliary indicating the writer's conjecture which is not based on any particular information or evidence.
Probably
	I. 106
方をする	
A phrase to indicate a manner of doing something.
Do something in a ~ fashion/manner/way
	I. 109
かと言うと	
A conjunction to indicate the speaker's assertion that a popular belief is not right.
You would think that ~ but (that is not right)
	I. 114
（の）代わりに	
An action/state that is expressed in the subordinate clause is balanced by another action/state expressed in the main clause, or something/someone that is replaced by something/someone else.
Instead of; instead; but (to make up for ~); so (to make up for ~); in place of
	I. 116
結果	
A noun which expresses the idea "as a result of".
As a result of; after; upon
	I. 121
結構	
An adverb that indicates that something exceeds the speaker's and/or hearer's expectation to a considerable degree.
Quite; rather; pretty
	I. 123
この	
A demonstrative adjective which indicates a time or time period around the moment of speech.
The last; this past; this; this coming
	I. 127
こうした	
A demonstrative which refers to someone or something mentioned as an example in previous discourse.
Such; like this
	I. 130
こそ	
A particle which emphasizes a word, phrase, or clause.
The very ~; it is ~; that ~; only (when, after, because, etc.); in particular; precisely; definitely; [an italicized or underlined word]
	I. 132
こと	
An auxiliary noun to express a command.
(don't) V; should (not); (not) ought to; may not
	I. 135
ことで	
A compound particle which indicates a means or a cause.
By V-ing; because; result in; cause
	I. 137
ことになる	
A phrase which indicates that an action or event leads to a certain situation or logical conclusion.
End up (with); cause; come to mean that
	I. 140
ことによる	
A phrase which is used to present an event as the cause of something.
Be due to the fact that; be caused by; be brought about by; be the result of; because
	I. 143
ことはない	
A phrase which expresses the idea that there is no need to do something or that there is no possibility of doing something.
There is no need to; not necessary; there is no possibility that; there is no chance to
	I. 146
く	
A continuative form of an い-type adjective.
And; so
	I. 148
くらい	
A particle which is used to express the degree of a state.
To the extent that; so ~ that ~ (almost) ~; at least; the only ~; rather than ~
	I. 151
くせに	
A conjunction which expresses the speaker's contempt, anger, or disagreement about someone's action, behaviour, or state.
Although; in spite of the fact that; and yet; but
	I. 155
までもない	
There is no point in going as far as to do something.
Not necessary (to bother) to; do not need (to go as far as) to; do not have to
	I. 159
まい	
An auxiliary which expresses the speaker's negative volition or conjecture.
Will not; will probably not; be probably not
	I. 161
まさか	
An adverb that indicates the speaker's strong belief that something is not expected to (have) become a reality.
Incredible; never thought; never dreamed; surely not; impossible; don't tell me that ~; not at all likely; absolutely not.
	I. 165
ましだ	
A phrase indicating that although someone/something (or some situation) is not satisfactory it is better than someone/something else.
Better; less objectionable; preferable; might as well ~
	I. 169
または	
A conjunction which connects two choices or possibilities expressed by noun phrases or sentences.
Or; either ~ or ~
	I. 171
目	
A suffix which represents an ordinal number.
-th; -th one
	I. 174
面	
A suffix which forms a compound that means a side of X, or an aspect of X.
(on) the side of; (from) the aspect of; (from) the standpoint/viewpoint of; in terms of
	I. 176
みせる	
The speaker's strong determination to achieve something for others to see.
Can manage to; will definitely do; am determined to
	I. 177
も	
A particle which implies that something else is also (not) the case.
Also; too; (not) either; (not) even
	I. 179
も~ば	
A structure which expresses the idea that a certain amount of something is sufficient to do something.
Be enough to/for; if ~ at least; if ~ as much/many as ~, it will be enough to
	I. 184
も~も	
A structure which presents two states or actions of someone or something.
Both ~ and ~; neither ~ nor ~; also; (not) either
	I. 185
もの（だ）	
A dependent noun which is used to create a sentence structure which presents a characteristic of something.
(is) that which ~; (is) something which ~; (are) those which ~
	I. 189
なあ	
An exclamatory sentential particle which is used in informal male speech.
How ~!; what ~! ~!; I wonder; I wish
	I. 193
などと	
A compound particle that indicates an approximate quote of words or ideas.
(things) like ~; ~ or something like
	I. 197
ながら（も）	
A disjunctive conjunction used normally in written Japanese with the meaning of 'although'.
Although; even though; nevertheless
	I. 199
ないことも / はない	
A double negative phrase used to make a conditional affirmative statement.
It isn't the case that ~ not ~; it is not that ~ not ~
	I. 203
なかなか	
An adverb used to indicate the speaker's feelings that something is impressive or his annoyance at slowness or difficulty in achieving something.
Quite; fairly; considerably; (not) easily; pretty; (not) readily
	I. 206
なく	
a continuative form of ない used in written Japanese (to indicate a reason/cause for what follows if ない is attached to Adjective (い/な) and contrast if it is attached to a Noun+Copula).
Not ~ and; not ~ but
	I. 211
何でも	
A phrase that indicates the speaker's uncertainty about something.
I don't know for sure, but
	I. 215
何しろ	
An adverb that indicates the speaker's emotive feeling about some extreme state of affairs.
As a matter of fact; no matter what; believe it or not; you may be surprised, but ~; in fact; unbelievably
	I. 216
ならない	
A phrase that is used to express insurmountable psychological or physical feelings.
Cannot help -ing; irresistibly; unbearably
	I. 219
なり~なり	
A phrase to indicate two representative choices/examples.
~ or ~ (for example); like ~ or ~
	I. 223
なりに	
In a way/style that is proper to someone/something.
In one's own way; in one's own style
	I. 227
なしでは	
If something/someone is missing.
Without
	I. 230
ねばならない	
A phrase that indicates duty, obligation or necessity.
Must; have to; should
	I. 232
に	
A sentence final particle that expresses the speaker's feeling of great regret or sympathy.
	I. 234
に当たって/当たり	
A compound particle that indicates occasion of doing something or of having done something in formal Japanese.
On the occasion of; at; in; before; prior to
	I. 237
に反して/反する	
Contrary to or in contrast to.
Against; contrary to; in contrast to; in violation of; while; whereas
	I. 241
にほかならない	
A phrase that is used to indicate that an action/state mentioned in the topic phrase or clause is nothing but something.
Be nothing but ~; be simply ~
	I. 245
に限らず	
Not limiting something to ~.
Not limited to ~ (but also); not only ~ (but also)
	I. 249
に限って	
A compound particle to show that only X is different from others.
(X) of all (X's); only
	I. 250
に関して/関する	
Related to.
Concerning; with regard to; about; on
	I. 252
に代わって	
A compound particle to express replacement or substitution of a regular person/thing by someone/something.
In place of; replacing; on behalf of
	I. 254
に比べると/比べて	
If we compare (it) with/to; comparing (it) with.
Compared with/to; when compared with/to; in comparison to
	I. 256
にもかかわらず	
Without any relation to a preceding event/situation.
Although; though; in spite of; despite; notwithstanding; nevertheless
	I. 257
に基づいて/基づく	
With something as a basis.
Based upon
	I. 261
になると	
A phrase that expresses the time when an uncontrollable state or a habitual action occurs.
When it becomes; when it comes to; when; if
	I. 262
において/おける	
A compound particle which indicates the place of an action/event, a state or time.
At; on; in; during
	I. 265
に従って/従い	
Something spontaneously and gradually occurs in accordance with some change.
As, accordingly; in proportion to; in accordance with; following
	I. 268
に過ぎない	
Something or someone is nothing more than what is stated in terms of amount, degree, status, significance, etc.
Nothing more than; not more than; mere; merely; only; just; as little/few as; that's all
	I. 271
に対して/対する	
Regarding something/someone one opposes, compares, or shows interest in regarding something/someone one opposes, compares or shows interest in.
Toward; to; in contrast to; whereas; in regard to; in; per
	I. 275
にとって	
From the standpoint of; so far as someone (or something) is concerned.
To; for
	I. 278
について	
Concerning something/someone.
About; on; concerning; regarding; with regard to; of
	I. 280
につき	
A compound particle which expresses a rate or ratio.
A; per; for; on; to
	I. 283
につれて/つれ	
A phrase used to indicate that a change occurs in accordance with another simultaneous change.
As; in proportion to; with
	I. 285
には	
A conjunction/compound particle to indicate a purpose for doing something.
To; in order to; for; for the purpose of ~
	I. 289
によって/より	
A particle that indicates means, cause, agent of passive sentence, or dependency on a situation.
According to; due to; owing to; because of; depending on; from ~ to; by means of; on the basis of; with; by
	I. 297
の関係で	
A phrase indicating that something takes place or does not take place because of something.
Because of
	I. 302
のこと	
Things of/about.
About; in terms of; related to
	I. 304
のことだから	
Because it is a matter of X with which/whom something is habitually the case.
Because ~ is habitually/usually/often that way; because
	I. 306
のみ	
A particle which expresses a limit imposed upon an action, event, or a state.
Only; just; alone
	I. 307
の下で	
Under some object; under the control or influence of someone or something.
Under; in; with
	I. 310
の上では	
As far as ~ is concerned.
As far as ~ is concerned; as far as ~ goes; from the viewpoint/standpoint of; according to; in terms of
	I. 312
のは~のことだ	
A structure which focuses on a time when something takes place.
It will be/was ~ when/that ~
	I. 313
ぬ	
An archaic auxiliary that indicates negation.
Not
	I. 315
お~だ	
A phrase which expresses the speaker's respect for someone when describing that person's action or state.
	I. 318
をはじめ（として）	
A phrase that is used to give a primary example.
Starting with; not only ~ but also ~
	I. 320
お~下さい	
A phrase which expresses a highly polite request.
Please do something.
	I. 322
思われる	
A verb that indicates what the speaker/writer feels spontaneously or his/her hesitation about asserting himself/herself.
Seem; appear; apparently
	I. 325
おり	
Vます of the auxiliary verb おる.
Be ~ and
	I. 329
を通して	
A compound particle that is used to indicate a medium through which something is done or time through which something takes place.
Through; by the medium of; via; throughout
	I. 330
っぱなし	
An auxiliary which expresses the idea that someone or something keeps doing something, or someone leaves something in an improper state.
Keep -ing; have been -ing; leave
	I. 333
っぽい	
A suffix that indicates someone/something has some distinctive characteristic or an attribute identified by a noun, an adjective, or a verb to which the suffix is attached.
Apt to; easy to; -ish; -like
	I. 337
来	
During a certain amount of time (something has continued up until the moment of speech or something has never been like the current state).
For; in; since
	I. 343
例の	
A phrase which signals that the referent of the following noun phrase is definite and that the speaker expects the hearer to understand what the referent is.
The ~ (in question); that (same); the usual
	I. 346
Relative Clause	
	I. 349
Rhetorical Question	
A question which functions as a forceful statement with no expected response.
	I. 352
ろくに~ない	
A structure that is used to indicate that something animate does not or cannot do something satisfactorily/sufficiently/properly.
Not sufficiently; not satisfactorily; not properly; not well; hardly
	I. 355
さ	
A sentence final particle used in highly informal speech by male speakers to express different degrees of assertion ranging from a light touch comment up to opposition or imposition.
You know; sure; I tell you
	I. 358
さえ	
An emphatic particle which expresses the idea of "even" in non-conditional clauses (or sentences) or the idea of "only" in conditional clauses.
Even; if ~ only; if ~ just; as long as; the only thing ~ need is
	I. 363
際（に）	
On the special occasion of/when.
When; on the occasion of; at the time of
	I. 369
さすが	
An adverb that expresses the speaker's/writer's strong feeling that something has turned out as s/he expected.
As might be expected; after all; it is only natural that ~; naturally; truly; really; indeed; impressive
	I. 374
せい	
A dependent noun expressing a cause which brings about an undesirable result.
Because; due to
	I. 378
せめて	
An adverb that indicates the speaker/writer's minimally satisfactory level.
At least
	I. 383
次第	
A conjunction/noun to express that an action indicated by a preceding verb or an action implied by a preceding noun is a prerequisite for another action.
As soon as; depend on
	I. 385
しかも	
A conjunction which is used to provide additional important information.
Moreover; furthermore; besides; on top of that; what's more; what's worse; more surprisingly; at that; nevertheless; and yet; even so
	I. 390
したがって	
A conjunction that is used to indicate that a result/situation follows necessarily from the foregoing situation.
Therefore; accordingly; consequently
	I. 395
そうかと言って	
A structure which expresses that the speaker/writer cannot easily accept the corollary from the preceding statement owing to some circumstances, although he feels like accepting it
But; yet; even so
	I. 397
そこで	
A conjunction which connects a situation presented as a reason and an action taken because of that situation
So; because of that; therefore
	I. 401
そこで (2)	
A conjunction which connects an event and an action taken at the time of the event
Then; at that time
	I. 405
そこを	
A conjunction used to indicate that in spite of the negative situation mentioned in the previous part of the sentence/discourse some positive effort is made.
But; in spite of that
	I. 407
そうになる	
A phrase expressing that something almost happens.
Almost
	I. 409
その上	
A conjunction which introduces an additional, emphatic statement.
On top of that; besides; moreover; furthermore; what's more; what's worse; not only ~ but also
	I. 413
それでも	
In spite of the circumstance expressed in the preceding sentence.
Nevertheless; yet; but in spite of that; even so
	I. 418
それどころか	
A conjunction that is used to indicate that the level/degree of a fact or a situation expressed in the second sentence is far above or below the level/degree of a fact or a situation expressed in the first sentence.
On the contrary; far from that; as a matter of fact
	I. 420
それが	
An interjection which signals that the speaker is going to provide an unexpected response to a question.
Well (contrary to your expectation; I'm afraid to say this, but)
	I. 423
それも	
A conjunction which is used to add more specific information to information about a rather uncommon action or state.
What's more; what's worse; at that; furthermore; moreover; on top of that
	I. 425
それに	
A conjunction which introduces an additional item or statement.
(and) in addition; moreover; furthermore; what's more; on top of that
	I. 427
それと	
A conjunction which introduces an additional item or statement.
And; also; in addition; as well
	I. 431
それは	
An interjection which is used when the speaker emphatically provides an expected response to a question.
(yes,) naturally; (yes,) of course; oh, surely
	I. 434
それぞれ	
Each of two or more things/persons.
Each; respectively
	I. 436
すぐ	
Without having much temporal or physical distance.
At once; soon; right away; immediately; readily; instantly; easily; right
	I. 439
たびに	
A conjunction to express that each time someone/something does something, something else takes place.
Every time; each time; on every occasion; whenever
	I. 442
ただ	
An adverb which emphasizes the idea of "only".
Only; just; simply; that's all
	I. 445
ただの	
Not deserving to be mentioned.
Usual; ordinary; plain; common; rank and file
	I. 449
確かに~が	
A structure which expresses the idea "indeed ~ but".
Indeed ~ but; certainly ~ but; truly ~ but; it is true that ~ but; I admit that ~ but; definitely ~ but
	I. 450
たところで	
Even if an action or a state were realised.
Even if
	I. 452
て	
After/since a point in time at which something takes place.
And; since; having done something
	I. 455
て初めて	
A phrase which expresses the idea that someone does something or something happens only after something else happens or something else is done.
Not until; only after; for the first time
	I. 456
点（で）	
A noun which expresses the idea of "a point of argument; a point of evaluation; a point of view".
Point; respect; regard; aspect; way; in terms of; -wise; in that; as far as ~ is concerned
	I. 458
ては	
A conjunction which presents an action/state as a topic about which a negative comment is given.
If; when; because
	I. 461
と	
A particle which makes an adverbial clause, with a verb of saying/thinking/understood after it.
(thinking/saying) that ~; because; like; in such a way that ~
	I. 464
と同時に	
A phrase which is used to express the idea that someone does something or something takes place at the same time as another action or event, or that someone or something is in two states simultaneously.
At the same time (as); at the time; when; as; while; as well as ~
	I. 471
と言っても	
A phrase which is used to clarify a statement in the preceding discourse which might be misleading.
Although ~ say/said that ~; even though ~ say/said that ~
	I. 474
という風に	
A phrase which expresses a manner or a way in which someone does something.
In such a way that; in such a fashion to suggest/show (etc.) that; as if to say/show (etc.) that
	I. 478
ということは	
A phrase which changes a sentence into a topic noun clause.
That; the fact that
	I. 480
というのに	
A conjunction to indicate that an action/state takes place quite contrary to one's expectation.
But; although; in spite of the fact that ~
	I. 484
というのは~ことだ	
A structure which is used in interpreting, explaining, or defining a word, a phrase, or a sentence.
Mean; the meaning of ~ is; what ~ means is
	I. 487
と言うと	
A phrase which is used when something which someone has mentioned causes an involuntary response.
When ~ mention; if ~ say that ~; when ~ say that ~; when it comes to
	I. 492
というより（は）	
A phrase that is used to indicate more accurate characterisation of someone or something.
Rather than; more ~ than ~
	I. 495
とかで	
A conjunction that is used to give an uncertain reason for something.
For some reason like ~; saying something like ~; because ~ or something like that
	I. 498
ところ	
A dependent noun which is used to express the idea that when someone did something, something took place as the result.
When; then
	I. 500
ところが	
A conjunction which is used to present what in fact happened or what is in fact the case when something else was/is expected.
However; but
	I. 503
とも	
A conjunction in written Japanese that is used to express a concession.
No matter ~ may be; even if; at ~ -est
	I. 507
となる	
A phrase which expresses the idea that someone or something becomes something.
Become
	I. 511
となると	
A phrase which expresses the idea "when it comes to" or "if it is true that".
When it comes to; if it is true that ~; if it is the case that ~; if it turns out that ~
	I. 512
通り（に）	
A dependent noun which expresses the idea that someone does something or something takes place in the same way as something else.
(in) the same way as; (in) the way; as
	I. 514
とする (1)	
A phrase indicating that someone assumes something.
Assume that; regard ~ as; let; suppose
	I. 518
とする (2)	
To have a sensory or psychological experience.
Feel ~; look ~
	I. 523
途端（に）	
A noun/adverb which expresses the idea that 'something occurred the moment someone did something or something took place'.
The moment; just as; as soon as; then
	I. 525
とうとう	
An adverb that is used to express the eventual arrival of an expected situation.
Finally; at (long) last; eventually; in the end; after all
	I. 528
と共に	
A phrase which is used to express the idea that A and B share a common property or do the same thing together, that two things take place at the same time, or that someone or something possesses two properties.
As well as; with; along with; at the same time; when, as; while
	I. 532
とは限らない	
A phrase which expresses the idea "not necessarily".
Not always; not necessarily
	I. 536
つまり	
An adverb that is used to summarise or rephrase what has been mentioned/stated in the preceding context.
That is (to say); namely; in short; to sum up; in other words; after all; that means
	I. 538
つつ	
(1) an auxiliary which expresses an action in progress; (2) a conjunction which is used to present two concurrent actions.
-ing; while; although
	I. 542
（の）上で	
A compound particle that is used to express a preparatory action for a relatively important action.
Upon ~; after ~
	I. 547
上（に）	
A conjunction which introduces an additional, emphatic statement.
As well; in addition; besides; furthermore; moreover; not only ~ but also
	I. 551
得る　（うる・える）	
An auxiliary verb that expresses possibility.
Can; possible; -able
	I. 553
Vmasu	
A continuative form of a verb which means "V and...".
And; -ing
	I. 556
Vmasu as a Noun	
Vます used as a regular noun.
	I. 561
は	
A particle which emphatically affirms or negates the proposition represented by the preceding verbal and other related elements.
[emphatic] {do/does/did} V; will V; {am/are/is/was/were} Adjective/Noun; (not) V/Adjective/Noun
	I. 564
は言うまでもなく	
An adverbial phrase that conveys the meaning of 'not to speak of something/someone'.
Not to speak of; let alone; not to mention; to say nothing of
	I. 568
わけだ	
A phrase which presents a fact or truth known to the hearer as an introduction to a following statement, or which gives emphasis to a fact or truth which the hearer might not know.
As you know; the fact is that ~; the truth of the matter is that ~
	I. 570
わけではない	
A phrase which is used to deny what is implied in the previous or following statement.
It does not mean that ~; I don't mean that ~; it is not that ~; it is not true that ~; it is not the case that
	I. 574
わけがない	
A phrase which negates the existence of a reason to believe that someone does something or is in some state, or that something takes place; or which negates a possibility of someone's doing something or being in some state, or something's taking place.
There is no reason why ~; it is impossible (for ~) to ~; cannot
	I. 578
わけにはいかない	
A phrase which is used to indicate that one cannot do something due to an external circumstance.
Cannot; cannot but ~; cannot help -ing; have no (other) choice but to ~
	I. 581
やる (1)	
To cause something/someone to move to a place or to do/eat/drink something.
Send; give; do; play; operate; eat; drink
	I. 584
やる (2)	
An auxiliary verb which expresses the idea that someone does something undesirable to someone else when he/she knows his/her action will cause hardship or trouble.
(knowing that it will cause someone trouble/difficulty)
	I. 589
やっと	
An adverb to indicate that something desirable has been finally achieved or will be eventually achieved though with great difficulty.
Finally; at last; barely
	I. 591
よう (1)	
A noun forming suffix which means a way (of doing something).
A/the way to; a/the way of -ing; the way (someone does something)
	I. 595
よう (2)	
An auxiliary verb that expresses the writer's conjecture about some potentiality or his certainty about a given state of affairs.
Probably; likely; must be; should; ought; naturally
	I. 599
より	
An adverb which forms the comparative of an adjective or an adverb to mean 'more ~ than now or than otherwise'.
More ~ (than now; than something at present; than otherwise)
	I. 602
ざるを得ない	
An auxiliary indicating that there is no other choice but to do something.
Cannot help -ing; cannot (help) but; have no choice but to ~; have to
	I. 606
ぞ	
A sentence final particle that emphasises a male speaker's emotion about something in his monologue or his strong desire to draw someone else's attention.
I tell you; I'm telling you; you know
	I. 609
あえて	
An adverb that expresses the speaker's/writer's desire or will to dare to do something in spite of difficulty, danger or opposition.
Daringly; boldly; dare to ~; venture to ~; force oneself to ~
	A. 3
あげく（に）	
An adverb/conjunction indicating that one spends an extended period of time before reaching a result.
in the end; finally; eventually; after
	A. 7
あくまでも	
An adverb that represents the idea of "to the utmost degree".
to the end; persistently; insist; strictly; just; under any circumstance; absolutely; never; completely; ultimately
	A. 11
あながち～ない	
A structure that indicates that something is not necessarily the way the speaker/writer thought.
(not) necessarily; (not) always
	A. 14
あるいは	
A conjunction that marks alternatives
or; either ~ or; perhaps
	A. 16
あたかも	
An adverb used to present a counter-factual statement emphatically
(just) as if ~ were; (just) as if ~ did ~; just like; just; exactly
	A. 21
ばかりに	
A conjunction indicating that a single factor causes a negative situation.
Simply because; just because; simply on account of ~
	A. 25
ばこそ	
A conjunction that emphasizes a reason
it is precisely because ~ that ~; only because ~; to the extent that ~
	A. 27
べからず・べからざる	
An auxiliary verb that indicates a strong prohibition.
Shouldn’t; must not; ought not to ~; cannot; don’t ~
	A. 29
べく	
The verb modification form of the auxiliary bekida, which is used to indicate a purpose or aim.
In order to; to; for the purpose of; for; so that ~ (can)
	A. 32
べくもない	
A phrase meaning “it is impossible to do something”
Impossible; there is no way for someone to ~; cannot be expected to
	A. 34
べくして	
A phrase used when something occurs/occured exactly as expected
Exactly as expected
	A. 36
ちなみに	
A conjunction to indicate that what follows is additional information related to the previously stated main theme
Incidentally; in this connection
	A. 40
だけ	
A particle meaning “to the extent that someone (can/wants to) do something or something can happen”.
As much as; as ~ as possible; as much as one wants
	A. 42
だけあって	
A phrase that means “and as one would expect” or “for good reason”.
And as one would expect; so (naturally); for good reason
	A. 45
だけに	
A phrase that carries the idea “as one would expect”.
And as one would expect; so (naturally); because
	A. 47
だけのことはある	
A phrase expressing an evaluative comment regarding how something is contributing to an expected, remarkable result.
Don’t do something for nothing; ~ explains it; no wonder; it’s no surprise
	A. 51
だに	
A particle indicating that something expressed by the preceding verb alone produces a certain feeling or the meaning “(not) even doing something; doesn’t even occur”.
Just; (not) even
	A. 54
だの	
A conjunction that lists nouns/quotes inexhaustively.
And (~ and); or (~ or); and things like that
	A. 57
だって (1)	
A conjunction that indicates a reason.
Because
	A. 60
だって (2)	
A particle meaning “too” or “even”.
Too; also; (not) ~ either; even; any; no matter what/who/how/etc.
	A. 63
であれ	
A conjunctive phrase that expresses the idea of concession.
Even; even if; even though; no matter what/who/how/etc.~ may be; whatever/whoever/etc.~ may be
	A. 67
～であれ～であれ	
A structure that means “no matter which one is the case”
Whether X or Y; be it X or Y; or
	A. 71
でも・じゃあるまいし	
A phrase expressing the speaker’s belief that someone’s action is based on mistaken identity of himself/herself and also expressing the speaker’s critical comments about someone’s behaviour.
You are not ~, so; it isn’t ~, so
	A. 74
～でも[Wh. word]でも	
A structure indicating that what is expressed in the main/subordinate clause is applicable to anyone, anything, any place or any time.
~ whatever; ~ whoever; ~ whenever; ~ whichever
	A. 76
どちらかと言うと	
A phrase indicating that the speaker/writer chooses one alternative over another in a tentative way.
Rather; more like ~; more of ~; rather on the ~ side; rather than otherwise; more ~ than ~
	A. 78
どうか	
An adverb indicating a polite yet very strong request.
Please
	A. 82
どころではない	
A phrase indicating that an action/state is simply impossible due to an adverse situation.
Cannot; be simply impossible; simply don’t/doesn’t have time; be far from ~; anything but ~; no way; far from; be out of question
	A. 85
ども	
A conjunction that indicates concession based on an actual state or action.
Even though; although; though; no matter how much/often/hard/etc.
	A. 88
どうにも～ない	
A structure indicating that no matter how hard someone may try, something is impossible.
Not ~ by any means; no matter how hard ~ try, ~ cannot ~; there is no way to ~; cannot do ~ at all
	A. 92
同士	
A sufﬁx that adds the meaning of “the same things/people”.
Each other; between/among (things/people of the same kind, group, etc.); together; with
	A. 94
が早いか	
A conjunction indicating that as soon as something happens, something else happens.
As soon as; the moment; no sooner ~ than
	A. 99
～が～なら	
A structure presenting a counterfactual situation which indicates that things would be better if something were really good or appropriate.
If someone/something were a really good/appropriate one; if something is right
	A. 101
ごとし	
An auxiliary adjective that indicates a resemblance of something/someone to something/someone or indicates how something/someone appears to speaker/writer.
Like; look like
	A. 103
反面	
A conjunction used to contrast the positive and negative sides of something/someone.
While; on the other hand
	A. 107
はたして	
An adverb indicating that something occurred as the writer expected, or expressing in a concession clause the writer’s strong doubt.
Just as ~ though; as expected; really; in fact; sure enough; indeed; at all; lo and behold
	A. 111
ひいては	
An adverb indicating that something is perceived to eventually lead to a signiﬁcant result.
Eventually (lead to) ~; even
	A. 114
一[Counter]として～ない	
A structure that means “not a single one".
Not a single ~; not even one; not any ~
	A. 117
ひとつ	
An adverb used when the speaker intends to do something, or asks someone a favour, or makes a suggestion or gives advice to someone.
Give something a try
	A. 119
一つには	
An adverb meaning “partly” in a context where someone gives one or two objectives, benefits, examples or reasons for something.
Partly; for one thing
	A. 122
一応	
An adverb indicating that an action or state is only temporary or tentative or is superﬁcially conceived.
For the time being; for the present; for now; tentatively; for formality’s sake; nominally; kind of; sort of
	A. 126
如何（だ）・いかん（だ）	
A classic form of the adverb どのように “in what way”.
How; what; (depending on) how/what; (according to) how/what; depend on
	A. 128
いかなる	
A noun modifier that means either “what kind of” or “no matter what”.
What kind of ~; no matter what ~; whatever; any kind of
	A. 132
いかに	
An adverb meaning “how”.
How; how much; how hard
	A. 135
いくら	
A Wh-word that asks about the amount of something.
How much; how
	A. 138
今更・いまさら	
An adverb indicating that someone feels that it is too late to do something.
Too late (for/to ~); now
	A. 141
一方（だ）	
A phrase indicating that “something happens continuously” or “someone does something repeatedly”.
Only; always; continue to; keep ~ing; be steadily ~ing; become ~er and ~er
	A. 146
一方（で）	
A conjunction used to present two concurrent actions/events/states or contrastive situations.
While; when; (but) at the same time; on the other hand; even though; although
	A. 149
以来	
An adverb meaning “since”
Since
	A. 154
一切～ない	
A structure that means “not at all”.
Not ~ at all; absolutely not; not ~ whatsoever
	A. 159
一旦・いったん	
An adverb meaning “once” or “for a short time”.
Once; for a time; temporarily; for the moment; for the present; now
	A. 161
言ってみれば	
A phrase signalling a comparison (including the use of simile and metaphor), a deﬁnition, or an explanation.
Figuratively speaking; so to speak; metaphorically speaking; in a manner of saying
	A. 164
言うまでもない	
A phrase indicating that what the speaker/writer expresses is generally known but that he/she presents it as a reminder.
It is needless to say that ~; needless to say; it goes without saying
	A. 167
言わば	
An adverb that means “if I were to say it some way (or a different way)”.
So to speak; as it were; like; sort of
	A. 170
いわゆる	
A noun modifier that means “known generally by this term”.
So-called; what we call; known as
	A. 172
自体	
A dependent noun that is used to emphasize the referent of the preceding noun.
Oneself; in and of itself; the very
	A. 174
限りだ	
A phrase that indicates the extreme degree of the speaker’s/writer’s emotion — happiness, sorrow, envy, shame or loneliness, among others
extremely
	A. 177
甲斐・かい・がい	
A dependent noun that means something is worth someone’s effort.
Worth; meaning; effect; result
	A. 179
か否か	
A conjunctive phrase indicating that the speaker/writer is wondering whether something is the case or not.
Whether X or not
	A. 182
かな	
An interjection that expresses deep felt emotion.
How ~ !; what a(n) ~ !; to my/our ~; it is ~ that
	A. 185
かのように	
A conjunctive phrase that forms an adverbial clause which describes the way someone/something appears to the writer, contrary to reality.
As if
	A. 187
から言って	
A phrase that means either “in terms of” or “judging from”.
In terms of; from the viewpoint of; judging from
	A. 190
からなる	
A phrase indicating that something consists of more than one member/constituent.
Consist of; be composed of
	A. 192
からには	
A subordinate conjunction meaning “now that,” “once someone does / has done something” or “so long as”.
Once; now that ~; as long as ~; so long as ~; if
	A. 195
からして	
A phrase that singles out something for emphasis or presents something as a basis for judgment.
Even; judging from
	A. 199
仮に	
An adverb that indicates the speaker’s/writer’s tentative supposition.
Supposing that; suppose; providing that; (even) if
	A. 201
かと思うと	
A phrase indicating that an action or state in the dependent clause occurs very closely with another action or state in the clause, or causes another action or state in the main clause.
As soon as (one notices that) ~; soon after; when one thinks/feels that ~
	A. 206
且つ・かつ	
A conjunction meaning “and” that connects words, phrases and sentences.
And; and also; yet; but; and ~ as well; as well as; moreover
	A. 209
きらいがある	
A phrase indicating that someone or something has an undesirable tendency.
Have a tendency to; tend to; have a touch of ~; have a dash of ~; smack of ~; be slightly ~
	A. 214
（っ）きり	
A conjunction indicating that since something occurred, nothing has happened and the resultant situation remains unchanged; a particle indicating a strict limitation in terms of number/quantity.
Since; only
	A. 219
っけ	
A colloquial sentence final particle marking a question.
	A. 223
この上ない	
A phrase that indicates that something or someone is in an extreme state.
Extremely; utterly; very; so; cannot be more; extreme; utmost
	A. 226
ことか	
A sentence final, exclamatory phrase used in written language.
How ~!; what a(n) ~!
	A. 230
ことから	
A phrase that expresses a reason or a cause.
Because; due to; from the fact that ~; cause; trigger
	A. 233
ことに	
A phrase that expresses the speaker’s/ writer’s emotion or subjective judgment.
It is ~ that; I am ~ that; we are ~ that; to my/our ~; ~ly
	A. 235
加えて	
A conjunction that means “in addition to what has just been mentioned”.
In addition; and additionally; what’s more
	A. 240
まで（のこと）だ	
A phrase indicating someone’s decision to cope with a negative situation, or a simple, straight forward reason for his/her action.
Just; merely; only
	A. 243
まして（や）	
An adverb expressing the idea that because one statement is true, the subsequent statement is naturally true.
To say nothing of; not to speak of; let alone; still more; much less; all the more reason why
	A. 245
また	
An adverb/conjunction that indicates repetition or addition.
Again; also; too; (not) ~ either; and; additionally; or
	A. 248
滅多に～ない	
A structure that indicates extremely low frequency.
Rarely; seldom; hardly; almost never
	A. 252
見るからに	
A phrase indicating that something can be (obviously) recognized through visual cues.
Visibly; obviously; really look; can be easily recognised as; can tell just by looking at ~
	A. 254
～も[V]ば～も[V]	
A structure used to present typical examples of actions, events, situations, people, or things among a number of possibilities.
There are times when ~ and/or ~; sometimes ~ and sometimes ~; sometimes do things like ~ and ~; some (people/etc.) ~ and some (people/etc.) ~
	A. 258
ものではない	
A sentence-ﬁnal phrase indicating that one shouldn’t do something, one could not possibly do something, or one naturally cannot do something.
Shouldn’t; not possibly; naturally cannot; cannot bear
	A. 263
ものか (1)	
A rhetorical question marker that expresses a strong negative intention or disagreement.
Definitely not; absolutely not; impossible
	A. 266
ものか (2)	
A phrase indicating that the speaker wants to do something or is wondering what one he/she should choose.
Wish; wonder if; should
	A. 268
ものなら	
A conjunction indicating that the preceding clause presents a hypothetical situation that is unlikely to become a reality.
If; if ~ at all
	A. 272
ものの	
A conjunction that means “although”.
Although; though; even though; but
	A. 274
ものを	
A disjunctive coordinate conjunction expressing the meaning of “although” with the speaker’s strong feeling of discontent
Although; but
	A. 279
もさることながら	
A phrase used to mention something important and then introduce something more signiﬁcant.
~ is one thing, but; it is true that ~, but; it is the case that ~, but; but more importantly
	A. 283
もしくは	
A conjunction to disjunctively connect two items or ideas.
or
	A. 285
もっとも	
A conjunction used to add a comment indicating that what the speaker/writer has just expressed is not sufﬁcient.
Although; though; but; yet; however
	A. 288
向け	
A suffix that adds the meaning of “aimed at”
For; made for; for the use of; aimed at; directed towards; (directed/shipped/etc.) to
	A. 291
むしろ	
An adverb that indicates one of two things/people/characteristics has been chosen rather than the other to express speaker’s/writer’s desire, preference or judgment.
Rather; instead
	A. 295
ないでもない	
A phrase that indicates the speaker/writer hesitantly feels or expresses that something is the case.
Seem to ~; somewhat; rather; may
	A. 300
ないことには	
A phrase that means “if something has not taken place, something else won’t/can’t take place”.
If ~ not ~ then; unless
	A. 303
ないまでも	
An adverbial phrase expressing the speaker’s feeling that although an ideal action or state isn’t possible, at least the next best action or state is or should be available.
May not ~ but; even though ~ not; although ~ not
	A. 305
ないし（は）	
A particle that presents two possible choices or the minimum and maximum possible numbers/lengths/weights/etc. of something; or a conjunction that links two possible actions or events.
From ~ to ~; between ~ and ~; or
	A. 307
中を	
A phrase that specifies space or time in/through which someone/something does something.
In the midst of; when; while; through; among
	A. 312
なくして（は）	
A compound particle meaning “without something”.
Without; if it were not for ~
	A. 315
なまじ（っか）	
An adverb indicating that something (including an action/state) has a positive value which hasn’t been reached, causing something negative.
Halfheartedly; slightly; thoughtlessly; unwisely; inadequately; imperfectly; sort of; a little; somewhat; a bit of
	A. 318
並み	
A noun sufﬁx that adds the meaning “to match”.
About the same level as; like; as (much ~) as; to match; to rival; on a par with; equivalent to
	A. 323
何[(Number)+Counter]も	
A phrase that indicates there is a large number of things, people, etc.
Many; tens/thousands/etc. of ~
	A. 326
何～ない	
A structure indicating that something doesn't exist at all.
Doesn’t exist at all; without
	A. 328
何も～ない	
A structure indicating that an action is taken for no good reason.
Why ~ have to ~?; it is unnecessary to ~; have no good reason to ~; not need to ~
	A. 331
何らかの	
A phrase used to indicate that the exact nature of something represented by the noun cannot be speciﬁed.
Some; some kind of
	A. 333
何ら～ない	
A structure that is used to express a strong negative statement.
Not ~ at all; not any ~; nothing; no ~ whatsoever
	A. 334
なんて (1)	
A phrase used as the colloquial version of なんと.
What; how ~!; what a(n) ~!; so
	A. 337
なんて (2)	
A colloquial particle used to express a strong feeling such as astonishment, incredulousness, envy, disdain, dislike, happiness, etc.
That; things like
	A. 339
何とか	
An adverb expressing that someone somehow does something, or something somehow occurs.
Somehow; in some way; in one way or another; manage to
	A. 341
なお	
An adverb that indicates that an action or state is still going on or the degree of something increases; a conjunction indicating that an additional comment follows what has just been said in the preceding sentence.
Still; even more; all the more for ~; additional; and; additionally; furthermore
	A. 344
なおさら	
An adverb indicating that the degree of something increases due to an additional circumstance.
Still more; much more; all the more; even more
	A. 348
ならでは（の）	
A phrase indicating something is “impossible if it’s not X”.
Impossible if it’s not ~; only possible with/by/at/etc.; not possible with/by/at/etc. other ~; very difficult with/by/at/etc. any other ~ but; you can expect only/at/from/etc.; unless
	A. 350
並びに	
A conjunction used to combine two nouns or noun phrases.
And; both ~ and ~; as well as
	A. 353
なり	
A conjunction meaning “soon after”.
The moment; when; as soon as; soon after; no sooner ~ than
	A. 355
なるほど	
An adverb indicating that the speaker/writer afﬁrms the correctness of something he/she has heard/read/observed.
Indeed; it is true ~ (but); really; I see
	A. 359
なしに	
An adverbial phrase meaning “without (doing) something”.
Without
	A. 362
なす	
A verb that means “to cause something to happen”
Do; perform; make; change; constitute
	A. 365
なぜか	
An adverb indicating that the speaker/writer doesn’t know the cause of/reason for something
I don’t know why; without knowing why; for an unknown reason
	A. 370
なぜなら（ば）～からだ	
A structure used to introduce a reason for the statement in the preceding sentence.
The reason is that ~; because
	A. 371
んばかり（に）	
An adverbial phrase that is used when a situation looks as if someone were about to do something or as if something were about to occur literally or ﬁguratively.
As if ~ were about to ~; almost
	A. 374
願う・願います	
A verb that expresses a polite request.
Please; ask (for)
	A. 377
にひきかえ	
A phrase that indicates a sharp contrast.
In contrast to ~; while; whereas
	A. 380
にいたっては	
A compound particle that indicates an extreme example.
When it comes to ~; as for; for example
	A. 384
にかかわらず・に関/拘/係わらず	
A compound particle that means “regardless of”
Regardless of; independent of; without reference to; without distinguishing; whether X or Y; whether X or not; whatever/whoever/etc.
	A. 386
にかけては	
A compound particle that marks something in which someone excels or has conﬁdence.
When it comes to ~; as for; in point of; in terms of; about; regarding
	A. 391
にかたくない・に難くない	
A phrase that indicates that it is not hard to imagine or guess a situation.
Not hard; easy ~
	A. 393
に決まっている	
A phrase indicating the speaker’s/writer’s strong conviction or motivation.
Surely; be bound to; be a given; of course; must be; we all know that
	A. 395
に越したことはない	
A phrase used to indicate that a state or action is more desirable.
Nothing is better than; if possible; be the best; be ideal; the ~ the ~
	A. 398
に/ともなると	
A phrase that is used when something or some situation is perceived to be special.
When; if; as
	A. 401
に向けて・に向けた	
A compound particle that indicates the destination/direction of movement, the target/direction of an action, or the goal/purpose of an action.
Toward; to; at; aiming at; targeting; for; for the purpose of; in order to
	A. 404
～に～ない	
A sentence structure meaning “someone cannot manage to do something”
Cannot manage to; just cannot; cannot ~ even though ~ want to; cannot ~ despite the fact that ~ want to
	A. 408
に（も）なく	
A phrase that means something unusual happens or someone does something unusual.
Unusually; more ~ than usual
	A. 411
に応じて・応じた	
A compound particle that means “in response to”.
In response to; according to; depending on; appropriate for; suitable for; suited to; meet
	A. 412
にしろ・せよ	
A conjunctive phrase that carries the meaning of concession.
Even though (it is/was the case that); even if (it is true that); although (it is/was the case that); whatever/whoever/etc.; no matter what/who/how/etc.; whether X or Y
	A. 418
にしたところで	
A compound particle that means “even” or “also”.
Also; (even) for ~
	A. 423
にして (1)	
A compound particle that indicates a period of time/stage (in life) at which some surprising action or state takes place.
In; at; over; while
	A. 426
にして (2)	
A conjunction meaning “and” that is used to combine two noun phrases or な-adjectives.
And; both ~ and ~
	A. 429
にしてからが	
A compound particle indicating that something unexpected occurs.
even
	A. 432
にしても	
A conjunction that represents the idea of “even if someone decides to do something,” or “even if/though someone decides that something is true/the case”.
Even if (someone decides to/it is true that); although/even though (it is true that/it is the case that/we admit that/we agree that/etc.); whatever/whoever/etc.; no matter what/who/how/etc.; whether X or Y; as for ~, too; even (so)
	A. 435
にとどまらず	
A phrase indicating that something goes beyond a spatial/temporal boundary.
Doesn’t stop with ~; doesn’t end with ~; not limited to ~; going beyond ~; not only ~ (but also ~)
	A. 440
につけ	
A conjunction indicating that each time someone perceives something he/she feels or thinks something associated with it.
As; every time; whenever
	A. 444
にわたって・わたる	
A compound particle indicating that something takes place over a particular span of time or physical space.
For; over; extending; stretching; ranging; covering
	A. 447
によらず	
A compound particle that means “without depending on”.
Without; without ~ing; regardless of; independently of; without reference to; whether X or Y; whether X or not; whatever/whoever/etc.; no matter what/who/how/etc.
	A. 452
によると	
A compound particle that is used to identify the source of information provided in the sentence.
According to; based on
	A. 459
のみならず	
A phrase that is used in formal writing to mean “not only”.
Not only ~ (but also ~); not only that
	A. 461
のなんのって	
A phrase to emphasize that something/someone is/was in an extreme state or that someone does/did something to a great extent
So (~ that); so much/well (~ that); so ~ and
	A. 465
の無さ・のなさ	
A phrase that indicates a state where something is lacking.
Lack of; absence of
	A. 468
～の～のと	
A structure that states what is said by someone in order to express the speaker’s disagreement or dissatisfaction.
Saying ~, ~, and so on; saying ~ or ~
	A. 470
んとする	
A phrase meaning for “someone to try to do something” or for “something to be about to occur”.
Try to do; be about to
	A. 474
を中心に	
A phrase that means “with something/someone at the centre”.
Centering around; around; focusing on; mainly; primarily; with ~ as the center; with ~ as the leader; with ~ as the primary ~; take the lead
	A. 477
を介して/介した	
A compound particle that introduces a medium through which someone does something or something happens to someone or something.
Through; via; by means of; by ~ing
	A. 479
を禁じ得ない	
A phrase that is used when one cannot control emotions or reactions caused by emotions.
Cannot hold; cannot hold back; cannot keep back; cannot help ~ing; cannot keep ~ from ~ing
	A. 483
をめぐって・めぐる	
A compound particle meaning “concerning; over”, which is used with an issue over which different opinions, ideas, etc., are expressed or exchanged.
Centering around; in connection with; over; concerning; regarding; with regard to
	A. 486
思えば	
An adverb that indicates feelings of nostalgia or regret when recollecting one’s past experiences.
Come ot think of it; when I think back; on reflection
	A. 492
をものともせず	
A phrase indicating that someone does something bravely/fearlessly in spite of unfavourable circumstances.
In spite of ~; undaunted by ~; in definance of ~; in the face of ~
	A. 493
思うに	
A phrase indicating that the subsequent statement is the speaker’s/writer’s personal view.
In my view; it seems to me that ~; when I think (about ~); considering
	A. 496
をおいてほかに（は）～ない	
A phrase that means “there is nothing else besides X”.
(there is) no ~ but X; X is the only one; nothing else is ~ but X; no other ~ are/do something as ~ as X
	A. 499
折(に)	
A noun indicating special/uncommon and primarily desirable occasions which someone takes advantage of, or where someone is expected to do something or where something desirable takes place.
On the occasion; at the time; when; if; opportunity; chance
	A. 502
恐れがある	
A phrase that means “it is feared (that)"
It is feared (that); we fear (that); we are worried/concerned (that); there is a fear/risk/chance/concern/etc.; can; could; may; it is possible (that); be in danger of
	A. 509
を問わず	
A compound particle that means “without questioning”.
Regardless of; irrespective of; without reference to; whether X or Y; whether X or not; whatever/whoever/etc.; no matter what/who/how/etc.
	A. 514
及び	
A particle that connects two nouns or noun phrases.
And
	A. 521
およそ	
An adverb representing the ideas “all; totally; mostly; approximately”.
Generally; commonly; all; quite entirely; totally; utterly; (not) at all; for the most part; mostly; almost; approximately; roughly; about; rough; general
	A. 526
をよそに	
A compound particle that expresses someone’s indifference to warnings, criticism, advice, accusations, opposition, anxiety, wishes, eagerness, provocative actions, etc.
Indifferent to ~; contrary to ~; ignoring ~; despite
	A. 531
さも	
An adverb meaning “truly,” used when describing the way someone’s action or behaviour appears.
Truly; really; as if; so; that way; like that
	A. 534
更に	
An adverb/conjunction that represents the idea of “additionally” or “further”.
Even ~er; even more; additional; more; further; furthermore; in addition
	A. 540
さて	
An interjection indicating that the speaker/writer is going to talk about something different.
Well; now; well now; so
	A. 543
さぞ（かし）	
An adverb that is used when the speaker thinks that someone or something is in an extreme state.
I believe/I’m sure/I’m certain ~ very/really/truly ~; must be very/really/truly ~
	A. 547
そもそも（の）	
A sentence-modifying adverb used when the speaker/writer comments on or questions a fundamental point.
In the first place; to begin with; first of all; the very (beginning/origin/etc.); original; first; fundamental
	A. 550
そのもの	
A phrase used to refer strictly to the preceding noun (phrase) or adjective.
Itself; themselves; very; perfect; the definition of; the picture of; absolutely; totally; utterly; perfectly
	A. 553
それだけ	
An adverbial phrase indicating that the degree of something is proportionate to the degree of the state, action or event mentioned in the preceding sentence.
That much; to the same extent; to the same degree; equally
	A. 557
それなりに・の	
A phrase representing the idea that someone/something does something or is in a state in his/her/its own way, or in a way suitable to the situation or generally expected from the situation.
In one’s own way; accompanying; proportionate; suitable; expected; agreeable; reasonable; one’s own; proper to
	A. 559
末（に）	
A noun that indicates the end of a period or the time after long, hard mental or physical work.
After; at the end of
	A. 562
済む	
A verb that means “to be finished; to do (in the sense of being enough)”.
Take/cost/need/etc. only ~; do/manage (without/only with); get by/get away (without/only with); be let off (without/only with); be enough (if); be all right (if); not to have to: there is no need for
	A. 565
ただ	
A conjunction that introduces a supplementary remark.
But; however; only; the only thing is that ~
	A. 570
但し・ただし	
A conjunction indicating that there is a condition, restriction, proviso, etc., to the preceding statement.
However; but; only; here; provided that
	A. 573
たかが	
A noun modiﬁer used when the speaker thinks little of the referent of the modiﬁed noun or noun phrase.
Only; just; mere
	A. 576
たなり（で）	
A conjunction indicating that a situation or condition remains unaltered.
Without; while ~ staying; while ~ keep ~ing
	A. 580
単位で	
A phrase that indicates the smallest amount, number or unit of something (or people) involved.
By the; in sets/groups/lots/etc. of; in multiples of; each; every
	A. 582
単に	
An adverb that means “simply”
Just; only; simply; no more than; nothing but; solely; merely; alone
	A. 586
たるや	
A compound particle used to present a subtopic about which the writer provides surprising or impressive information.
When it comes to ~; speaking of
	A. 591
（っ）たって (1)	
The informal form of ても.
Even if; if; whether; no matter what/who/how/etc.
	A. 594
（っ）たって (2)	
The contracted form of と言っても or としても.
Even if (someone says that); even if someone tries to; although
	A. 597
てばかりはいられない	
A phrase representing the idea that someone cannot just keep doing something or waste time being consumed by some emotion.
Cannot just; cannot always; cannot just keep ~ing; cannot spend time just ~ing; cannot waste time just ~ing
	A. 600
～ても～ても	
A structure meaning “even if someone does something repeatedly”.
No matter how much/often/hard/etc.; no matter how many times
	A. 603
て仕方がない	
A phrase that represents emotions the speaker/writer cannot control or sensations/situations he/she cannot bear.
Cannot help ~ing; cannot stop feeling; (so ~ and) cannot control ~; so ~ and ~ cannot bare it; so; unbearably
	A. 605
てはいられない	
A phrase that is used when someone cannot be doing something or be in some state due to a given situation.
Cannot/shouldn’t be ~ing; cannot/shouldn’t keep ~ing; cannot/shouldn’t (stay/remain/etc.); cannot/shouldn’t waste time ~ing; cannot afford to; cannot help ~ing
	A. 609
とあって	
A phrase that introduces a reason when the speaker/writer considers it natural that someone does something or is in some state, or that something takes place for that reason.
Because ~, ~ as expected; because ~, naturally ~; because
	A. 612
とあっては	
A conditional phrase that indirectly presents a factual situation as a reason.
If it is true that; if it is the case that; if; because; since
	A. 615
とばかりに	
A phrase that indicates that someone does something in order to convey something or in such a way that someone is convinced that something is the case.
As if; as if to say that; as if ~ were convinced that; as if ~ believed that; as if ~ decided that
	A. 618
とでも言うべき	
A phrase that introduces a noun (or noun phrase) to describe the nature of someone or something.
Which could/may be called; which can/could be described as
	A. 622
といえども	
A conjunction that expresses the idea of “even (though)”.
Even; any; although; though; even though
	A. 624
～といい～といい	
A structure that introduces multiple perspectives when describing a person or a thing.
In terms of both ~ and ~; in terms of ~ as well as ~; from the perspective of both ~ and ~
	A. 628
といった	
A compound particle that introduces examples.
Like; such as; among others
	A. 629
といったところだ	
A phrase the speaker/writer uses to explain something in a brief/rough manner.
I would say ~; ~ is how I’d put it
	A. 633
と言って	
A conjunction used at the beginning of a sentence to convey the idea of “however”.
However; but; having said that
	A. 635
と言うか	
A phrase used to restate what was just said in order to be more accurate or appropriate.
Or; or rather; or I’d (rather) call it; or I may call it; or I’d (rather) say; or I may say
	A. 638
と言うのは	
A phrase that introduces the reason for what has just been said.
(I’m saying this) because; the reason (why I’m saying this) is that; by ~ I mean that; what I mean is that
	A. 640
~言わず~と言わず	
A structure indicating that something is the case not only for A and B but also for many other places, things, etc., of X, to which A and B belong
A, B and many other ~; A, B and every ~ else; including: whether X or Y
	A. 643
ところから	
A phrase that introduces the origins of names, theories, ideas and events.
Because; be caused by the fact that ~; from the fact that ~
	A. 645
ともなく	
A phrase indicating that the subject does something without paying much attention, or that when, where, to whom, etc., something took place is unclear.
Without intending to; without paying much attention; unconsciously; mindlessly; don’t know (exactly) who/where/etc. (but); cannot tell (exactly) who/where/etc. (but); (to/from) no particular (person, etc.)
	A. 648
ともすると	
A phrase that expresses the idea that something is likely to take place.
Tend to; apt to; be likely to; easily; be bound to
	A. 651
との	
A phrase that presents the content of the referent of the following noun (e.g., a report, notice, news, view).
That
	A. 655
とても～ない	
A structure that is used to deny emphatically the ability of someone/something or possibility of an event, state or action
Cannot possibly; totally impossible; there is no possibility; there is no way; not ~ at all; not ~ by any means; by no means
	A. 658
とは	
A compound particle marking an event, action or state that the speaker/writer does not expect and that causes him/her to feel some emotion
(not think/expect/etc.) that; (be surprised/be glad/regret/etc.) that
	A. 661
とは言え	
A conjunctive phrase meaning “although it is said that”
Although (it is said that/someone says that); even though (it is said that/someone says that); admitting that; that being said; however; nevertheless
	A. 664
つい	
An adverb used to describe someone doing something without being able to control himself/herself or used to indicate the closeness of a time or a place.
Unintentionally; without being able to control onself; without meaning to; carelessly; involuntarily; in spite of oneself; just; only
	A. 668
ついでに	
A phrase used to express the idea that someone does a second thing at the same time as the first because it takes less time or effort.
When; while (~ at it); as; on one’s way to; since ~ (anyway); as well; at one’s convenience
	A. 671
ついては	
A sentence-initial conjunction that means “with regard to this,” referring to what is stated in the preceding sentence.
Therefore; thus; so; because of this; for this reason; with regard to this
	A. 674
（と言）ったらない	
A phrase used to express a strong sensation or emotion.
So; extremely; indescribably; indescribable; incredibly; awfully; terribly; cannot tell you/describe/etc. how; too much of
	A. 678
はあれ	
A phrase expressing the idea “even though there is something”
Even though there is; although there is; there is ~ but
	A. 683
は別として	
A phrase used to present an exception or an issue the speaker/writer does not intend to cover as part of a larger statement.
Except for; putting/setting aside; whether X or Y
	A. 685
はいいとしても	
A phrase that conveys the meaning “even if I/we accept something, something else is not acceptable”.
Be all right, but; might be all right, but; would be fine, but; would accept ~, but; even if ~ accept; even though ~ accept; although ~ accept
	A. 691
はおろか	
A phrase that is used when something is not only true with one thing or person, but also with another thing or person that is less expected or understandable.
Let alone; not only ~ (but also ~); not to mention; to say nothing of; never mind; much less
	A. 694
割に（は）	
A phrase that expresses the idea that something is not in proportion to what one would normally expect.
For; despite; although; (not) as much as; (not) ~ because of that; considering
	A. 697
～わ～わ	
A structure that emphatically presents actions, events or states as examples or reasons, or indicates that someone does something or something happens to a great extent.
X and Y; for example, X and Y; because X and Y; so many; so much; one after another
	A. 701
や否や・やいなや	
A conjunction that expresses the idea that something happened or someone did something immediately following another event or action.
As soon as; no sooner ~ than; the moment; soon after; immediately after
	A. 706
やら	
A sentence-ﬁnal particle that marks a self-addressed question.
I wonder (if)
	A. 715
～やら～やら	
A structure to present things, events, actions, etc., as examples, reasons or possibilities.
X and Y; things like X and Y; X, Y and so on; whether X or Y; whether X or not
	A. 720
ようでは	
A conjunction that presents an undesirable situation, which is assumed to be factual.
If; if it is true that; if it is the case that
	A. 725
ようものなら	
A conjunctive phrase that presents　an undesirable hypothetical situation.
If ~ happen to; if ~ at all; if ~ choose to
	A. 728
ようにも（～ない）	
A conjunctive phrase that indicates concession: “even though someone tries to do something, he/she cannot do it for some reason”.
Even though ~ try/want to ~; even though ~ be thinking of doing ~; although ~ try/want to ~; although ~ be thinking of doing ~
	A. 730
より・のほか（に）（は）～ない	
A phrase that conveys the idea that there is no other choice than to do something, or that something is true of only one of a select few things.
There is no (other) choice but to; there is no other way than to; have to; nothing but; but; not ~ other than
	A. 734
由・よし	
A dependent noun that marks the content of what the writer has learned.
(I heard/It is said/etc.) that
	A. 738
ようと・が	
A conjunctive phrase that expresses the idea of concession.
Even if; whatever/whoever/ etc.; no matter what/who/how/etc.; whether X or Y
	A. 740
故に・ゆえに	
A conjunction that presents a reason or a cause.
Because; because of; due to; therefore
	A. 745
ずにはおかない	
A phrase that expresses the idea that someone/something necessarily or naturally causes something to happen.
Be bound to; definitely; unmistakably; unquestionably; undoubtedly; without fail; without doubt
	A. 750
ずして	
A phrase meaning “without doing something”.
Without ~ing; before (~ing); with no ~; if ~ do not; when ~ do not
	A. 753
ずとも	
A conjunctive phrase that indicates negative concession: “even if ~ not”.
Without ~ing; even if ~ not; if ~ not
	A. 755